From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
Over the past week, ICE and Border
Patrol agents have clashed with the
residents of Chicago and federal guard
troops arriving in the city might only
inflame tensions further.
Today, my colleagues Julie Bosman and
Matathias Schwarz explain the situation
on the ground and how Chicago fits into
a broader fight between the Trump
administration and the states where the
president is trying to send the National
Guard.
It's Wednesday, October 8th.
[Music]
Julie, we've seen this flurry of
activity around the country. In places
where President Trump has tried to send
the National Guard troops in. Two places
that we're watching super closely are
Chicago and Portland. And in both of
those cities, the officials are
desperate to try to keep these federal
troops out. And in Portland, they've
been successful so far, but not in
Chicago. Federal troops are actually on
their way to Chicago as we speak at
about 11:15 a.m. on Tuesday. And you are
there. You've been reporting on all of
this. Why are the troops coming to
Chicago?
>> So, the explanation from the Trump
administration is that the National
Guard is needed in Chicago to help
support ICE agents, to help support
other federal agents who are working
here and in particular to protect ICE
facilities. M.
>> So, we really saw this begin in early
September when the Trump administration
announced what they called Operation
Midway Blitz.
>> The White House says it's going after
what it calls the worst of the worst
criminals who are here in the country
illegally,
>> which they said was going to be a
crackdown on illegal immigration. They
said that they were going to come in and
really lay down the law in Chicago,
which is a sanctuary city. They don't
cooperate with federal immigration
authorities.
>> So the operation known as operation
midway blitz in Chicago continues. We
are told that hundreds of migrants have
been arrested.
>> So in the beginning we saw more arrests
than usual. And then around midepptember
ICE agents were attempting to make an
arrest in Franklin Park, a suburb of
Chicago.
>> Breaking news. A man is dead and an ICE
agent seriously hurt after an
immigration arrest ended in gunfire in
Franklin Park.
>> They pulled over a man and he according
to video and according to witness
accounts tried to drive away from the
agents in the course of this attempted
arrest. And the agents responded and one
of the agents shot and killed this man.
Yeah. The video investigations team here
at the Times actually took a close look
at that shooting and the ICE agents
claimed that the man that they shot was
trying to run them over, but if you
watch the video, it's not entirely clear
that either of them was truly in harm's
way. It's like a little bit ambiguous,
right? And it was a shocking incident to
so many people. They said, "Look, this
man was not a violent criminal. Why was
ICE arresting him? He had just dropped
off his children at daycare and then
he's pulled over in broad daylight and
shot. And I think that that incident
really started to raise questions about
IC's tactics and their training and how
they were performing these arrests and
whether they were doing it in a way that
was really in line with police and law
enforcement standards.
And after that, protests outside of the
ICE facility in Broad View, which is a
suburb of Chicago, really began to
intensify.
>> And ICE's response to the protesters who
were nonviolent, but were trying to
physically block vehicles from entering
and leaving the facility. ICE began to
respond with pepper spray, with tear
gas. They had agents on the roof and
they would fire pepper balls into the
crowd. We saw a pastor being teargassed.
Journalists were teargassed. An ICE
agent that was masked pointed his weapon
and shot directly at my car. He saw my
window was open and he shot right here.
You can see the point of impact right
there. CBS reporter who happened to be
just driving by in her car to check on
the facility when there was no protest
going on was shot with a pepper ball
through the open window of her car.
>> Oh wow.
>> The scariest part about this is uh I
could have been anybody. Um and I I
could have been killed. I was driving.
>> Yes. And this was pretty shocking. I
mean, I've covered a lot of protests and
usually if law enforcement uses pepper
spray or tear gas, they give plenty of
warning. They tell people to disperse,
there are number of actions that take
place before they get to that point. And
ICE was just deploying tear gas and
pepper spray whenever they wanted to.
And it was really shocking for those of
us who were in attendance and seeing
what was going on,
>> especially as you mentioned because
these protests, it sounded like they
were disruptive but mostly nonviolent.
>> Absolutely. And then a couple of
weekends ago, we saw something that was
even more shocking to people in Chicago,
which is that the Border Patrol began
marching through downtown streets. We
would see groups of uh border patrol
agents in camouflage.
>> Wait, border patrol? I didn't realize
that they would have jurisdiction there.
>> So, that has been one of the strangest
and most startling elements of this. So,
we are not near a US border, but yes,
border patrol has been here as well, and
they have done a lot of the immigration
arrests alongside ICE. And Governor
Pritsker addressed this at a news
briefing on Monday.
>> CBP is only allowed to operate within a
certain number of miles of the border
>> where he said, "Why is the Border Patrol
in Chicago at all?"
>> Well, they have declared that the border
is at the shores of Lake Michigan.
>> That is why they're allowed to operate
now, or at least why they're being told
they're allowed to operate uh in the
city of Chicago. and his answer was that
the US government has now said that the
border is at the shores of Lake
Michigan.
>> That doesn't seem right to me. The
border, as far as I know, first of all,
if you go all the way across Lake
Michigan, you'll find a border. But, uh,
but also, you know, more than a thousand
miles away from here.
>> So, I think there's a question of
whether the border patrol belongs in
Chicago at all. M.
>> So then last Tuesday, we woke up to the
news that Border Patrol and the FBI had
conducted a really large raid in an
apartment building on the south side of
Chicago. This was, from what we were
hearing, the biggest raid that they had
conducted yet in Operation Midway Blitz
and that this was just a giant operation
by Border Patrol standards. So, I
immediately drove down to the south side
and talked to people who lived in the
building and lived across the street
from the building. And the first person
I talked to was standing on the sidewalk
and he pulled out his phone and started
showing me videos that he had taken at
1:00 in the morning.
And what he had seen were Blackhawk
helicopters hovering over the building.
He had seen dozens of vehicles pulling
up outside, agents breaking windows.
They were going in all entrances of the
building. And then he saw people being
taken out of the building, zip tied. And
he said he could not believe what he was
seeing. That it felt like the whole
neighborhood was under siege. That he
just couldn't believe that this was
going on.
But there was a different message coming
from a video that DHS produced after the
raid.
And what we saw in this video was really
a kind of Hollywood style documentary
version of this raid.
>> There was overhead camera shots from a
drone. There was imagery of the
helicopters of agents repelling down
onto the roof.
You saw armed agents climbing on ladders
into windows and the agents were wearing
ballistic helmets. You saw people who
were being taken out of the building.
Some of them were shirtless young men
zip tied and being led away from the
building by agents.
So this was the version of the raid that
DHS provided and they said that they
were arresting people who needed to be
rounded up and arrested.
>> Do we know who they actually detained?
So they said that they had arrested at
least 37 people who did not have legal
immigration status and they described
these people as you know some had
criminal records. They said that they
were living in this apartment complex
that was frequented by members of a
notorious Venezuelan gang. And they said
that this was a raid that was really
targeting people who were violent
criminals. But then when we talked to
lawyers for some of the people who were
arrested said that there were people who
had been swept up in this raid who were
US citizens. DHS officials did
acknowledge that there were at least
four children who were US citizens who
were taken into custody at the apartment
>> presumably by mistake.
>> Either by mistake or just as collateral
damage as you know part of the
operation. just pull everybody into
custody and then sort out later who is a
US citizen and who isn't. And then we
heard from Mayor Brandon Johnson of
Chicago just this week that people had
been separated that Latinos and black
people had been separated into two
different vans. And Mayor Johnson of
course condemned this raid and the
treatment of people who were either
illegal immigrants or US citizens. Um he
just said the entire operation was
inhumane. It sounds like this video is
one of the many examples of how there
are sort of these conflicting narratives
about what is happening on the ground.
And clearly the administration is
seizing on one narrative in order to
help justify and message what it's
doing.
>> Yes. And I think what DHS is saying is,
look, we don't believe that Chicago and
Illinois are arresting all these people
and they're not going after them. So the
federal government just has to step in
here and arrest these violent criminals.
But we are still at this moment working
to learn more about the people who were
detained and arrested in that raid. We
need to find out a lot more about
whether they had criminal backgrounds,
whether they were in the United States
illegally. And I think that we will
learn a lot more in the coming days
about who those people were.
>> So what happened after this raid is that
people responded by saying, "Look, this
is really out of control. Federal agents
are not accountable to the people of
Chicago." And it really hit its high
point over last weekend on Saturday on
the southwest side of Chicago. We began
hearing that there were crowds building
in the Brighton Park neighborhood. And
what we began to learn is that according
to DHS's account, federal agents were
chased by two motorists from the city of
Oaklon, which is just outside of Chicago
into the southwest side of Chicago. And
then the two motorists rammed their
vehicles into the federal agents
vehicles. Again, according to the DHS
account, a female motorist then drove
her car in the direction of one of the
agents who had gotten out of his
vehicle. And at that point, the federal
agent shot the woman. She was injured
and went to the hospital and was
released. So, we immediately went to the
neighborhood to see what was going on.
And what I saw looked like a very
organic, spontaneous protest that had
popped up. You are treating people like
animals.
>> Respect.
>> And people were waving Mexican flags and
American flags. Some people had bull
horns.
>> Go home.
>> And there was just a lot of anger being
directed at the ICE agents.
>> Take off your face.
pulling tear gas into the ground
>> and there was also a liberal amount of
tear gas that was being deployed.
ICE agents were shooting pepper balls.
They were trying to disperse the crowd.
Again, this is in a residential
neighborhood, their homes, apartments,
storefronts right along this stretch of
street where this is all happening.
And then we saw that Chicago Police
Department officers began to respond and
they began to form a line between the
ICE agents and the protesters. And some
of the Chicago police officers were also
tear gas.
because there was not a lot of
coordination between the federal agents
and the local police officers. So, the
police officers were also coughing and
choking on tear gas along with members
of the crowd and journalists.
Julie, it feels worth noting just as I'm
listening to you that again the Trump
administration is saying that the
federal troops are now needed to protect
ICE so that ICE can do its job. But in a
lot of these chaotic moments that you
have described, it sounds like either
federal agents were the ones being the
aggressor in the situation or in the
case of the driver who was shot, it was
unclear whether there was actually any
danger. It just sort of feels as though
ICE is being the aggressor in most of
these situations. Is that accurate?
>> It depends who you ask. I think that DHS
would say, "Look, these immigration
agents are doing their job. This is a
function of the federal government to
arrest people who are in the country
illegally and we are stepping up and
doing that." If you look at it from the
perspective of a lot of people in
Chicago, especially people who are
Latino, and feel unfairly attacked and
targeted, they would say, "Look, this is
a a rogue police force. They are
sweeping up US citizens in their drag
net, right?
>> And they are not using proper policing
tactics. They're not trying to manage
crowds properly. and they are the ones
who are behaving in a dangerous fashion
and they are causing the conflict.
>> You know, it wasn't that long ago that
we did an episode about federal troops
going into DC. And at the time that we
did that, there was a lot of speculation
that Chicago was going to be next. And
people who were skeptical that that
would happen said, "No, no, no. Trump
does not have the same jurisdiction in
Chicago that he does in DC. It's much
easier to send troops to DC. you're not
going to see him so easily deploy troops
to cities around the country. And yet
here we are not that many weeks later
and it feels worth noting that they are
on their way to Chicago now. So it seems
like perhaps it was actually much easier
than folks had thought.
>> Right. He's had more success than I
think we had originally expected. But on
Monday, the state of Illinois and the
city of Chicago sued the Trump
administration, saying that there was no
justification for sending the National
Guard into the state, that there was
nothing happening here that required
this, that local and state law
enforcement had the situation completely
under control. And what Governor
Pritsker has also made clear is that he
sees this as a purely political ploy.
That President Trump is doing this to
try to make cities that are led by
Democrats look like they are out of
control. And also that the president is
trying to establish a legal precedent
that will allow the military to be
patrolling American cities.
So again, we see these two different
versions of what's happening on the
ground, the sort of competing narratives
and different sets of facts.
>> That's right.
>> And I think we're going to get some
answers from the courts in the next few
days. We are waiting for a federal judge
to make a ruling later this week and
that will hopefully tell us whether it
is legal or not to have the National
Guard here in Illinois.
Julie, thank you so much. Thank you,
Rachel.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
>> Matt, hi. Thank you for joining us.
>> Hi, Rachel. Glad to be here.
>> So, Matt, we are waiting for a judge to
decide whether the Trump
administration's decision to send the
National Guard into Chicago is legal or
not. And you have been following the
tension between Trump and the lower
courts throughout this administration.
So, I'm wondering how the fight in
Chicago fits into this larger picture,
specifically as it relates to the
administration's efforts to get National
Guard troops into various cities across
America.
>> Yeah. So, one way to look at the
challenges to these troop deployments is
sort of the latest front of this running
battle between Trump on one side and
democratic states and cities on the
other who have filed lawsuits to try to
stop the administration from carrying
out different pieces of its agenda. And
once again, uh, the first people who are
going to have to figure out who's in the
right are federal judges in the district
courts where these lawsuits are being
filed.
>> So basically, these judges are the ones
in the middle.
>> Yeah. The district court judges are in
the middle between these two sides and
they have two different jobs. First of
all, they need to figure out who's right
on the facts and the law. And second,
they have to preserve their own
legitimacy. They have to make rulings in
a clear and transparent way on the facts
and the law and keep the public's
confidence that they're not doing this
on a partisan basis. So, it's a tricky
line that the courts have to walk in
such a politicized environment when such
highstakes constitutional questions are,
you know, heading into court on an
almost daily basis. So, just to get into
the specifics of a couple of the most
recent cases in Portland and Chicago,
what exactly are they deciding?
>> So, it's now up to these district court
judges to decide whether it's legal for
the Trump administration to federalize
National Guard troops and then send them
to Portland and Chicago and potentially
to other cities down the line. M
>> so title 10 section 12406
gives the president the power to
federalize the national guard and send
them out into the states if he deems
that there is a rebellion and the judges
have two questions that they are going
to need to answer. One is, is this
actually a rebellion? And two, is that
question juditiable? Meaning, is it the
place of the federal courts to check the
president and to potentially
say, "No, executive branch, you say it's
in a rebellion. We we find that it
isn't." And we have an early indication
of where these district court judges
might come down. Over the weekend, Judge
Karen Immergate issued a ruling in
Portland saying that she was going to
block the Trump administration from
sending National Guardsmen to Portland
for the time being. It's a preliminary
ruling, but it it's a sign that the
judge is taking the arguments made by
the states and the cities very
seriously.
>> And how did the White House respond? So
on social media and on cable news, we
saw Steven Miller, one of Trump's top
advisers, who's kind of the architect of
this whole push to send soldiers into
American cities, repeating some familiar
refrains that we've heard a lot of over
these past few months.
>> Every night they come, they assemble,
they fight, they try to impede movement,
they physically attack. For what
purpose? to use actual physical violence
to change the result of the election.
>> He basically talked about the situation
on the ground in very warlike terms.
>> It is domestic terrorism. It is
insurrection and no amount of
>> said the protesters were engaged in
domestic insurrection which is a a very
loaded word.
>> ICE officers should not have to live in
fear and violence to do their jobs. and
he sort of echoed things that we've been
hearing from President Trump himself.
>> We have to leave the conversation there
because we're short on time. But
nevertheless, we do appreciate you
making the time for us and coming on CNN
and sharing your point of view
>> always. And we've seen this again and
again since President Trump has taken
office that when a judge rules against
him, he doesn't just say the judge
didn't see it my way. He he goes after
the judge personally and characterizes
their decision as political and suggests
that he may not necessarily be legally
bound to follow it at times.
>> You know, I saw the interview that
Steven Miller gave to CNN and it
reminded me a lot of what he and other
Trump officials were talking about at
Charlie Kirk's funeral just a few weeks
ago. Basically setting up this like us
versus them, good versus evil paradigm.
And I just sort of wonder if you are
seeing any echoes of that in what you're
looking at with these cases in Portland
and Chicago and some of the response.
Absolutely. I think this troop
deployment could be characterized as
part of a postkirk moment for the
administration where they really do in
some way feel like they are at war. And
I think there's a kind of attitude that
you've seen it again and again that just
he who is not with us is is against us.
And that that includes federal judges.
>> A them a them from the US versus them
paradigm.
>> Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. And what's so
striking about this Portland ruling is
that the judge who made it was actually
chosen by President Trump himself to to
be a federal judge. So they're trying to
cast Judge Imrate into a certain mold
and it's not an exact fit. Far from it.
>> Wait, tell me tell me more about her and
why is that not an exact fit? So, for
starters, as I mentioned, uh, Judge
Immergate is a Trump appointee. Uh, he
did nominate her to be a federal judge
during his first term. So, if she's such
a terrible far-left judge who's ruling
against the law and the facts is, then
one might ask, why did he choose her to
to join the bench in the first place?
>> Now, it's important to remember that
judges are more than just the president
who appointed them. That being said,
Judge Immergate has very strong
conservative credentials. She spent
decades as a prosecutor in Oregon. She
was chosen to be the US attorney for
Oregon by George W. Bush. She served
under Kenneth Starr during the
investigation of President Bill Clinton.
She personally deposed Monica Lewinsky
about her encounters with President
Clinton, surfacing some of the most
granular details that made their way
into the Star Report
>> and her time working for Ken Star
coincided with Justice Kavanaaugh's time
also working in that same office. Chief
Justice Roberts also worked for Kenneth
Star earlier when Kenar was solicitor
general. So she she's certainly someone
who came up through a kind of farm
system and a track that many of the
leading jurists on the right have also
followed.
>> And what did she actually say in her
decision over the weekend?
>> The essence of Judge Emmer's decision is
very clear. Her finding is that what is
happening in Portland is not a rebellion
as the government has claimed it is.
There's some also very I would say
strident passages where she makes clear
that the stakes of this case are
incredibly high. She says that this case
goes to the heart of what it means to
live under the rule of law in the United
States. She says that the relationship
between the federal government and the
states, between the military and
domestic law enforcement, between the
judicial branch and the executive
branch. She says all three of those deep
constitutional relationships are at play
here. It
>> it sort of sounds like she's sounding
the alarm a little bit.
>> I think that's right. There's a real
note of grave concern in this opinion
and I think it's directed at a number of
different audiences. Obviously the
parties, there's the appellet court
which might uphold or overturn it, but I
think she's also talking to the public
and saying this is something that you
really need to pay attention to. So
given the judge's background and the
argument in her decision, it does sound
like it would be a really difficult case
to make that this is some activist judge
making an ideological ruling against the
administration. Right.
>> I think that's right. So the big
question hanging over all this
litigation in California, in Illinois,
in Oregon, um, is does the president get
to define his own facts as a
constitutional matter? If he says it's a
rebellion, is that enough to make it a
rebellion? And we've seen this question
before with the Alien Enemies Act. If he
says it's an invasion, is that enough to
make it an invasion? And there are some
lawyers and also we've heard some judges
say that it is.
>> But as you've said, this ruling from the
judge in Oregon, right, gives us some
indication that at least at the district
court level, judges are putting their
foot down and they're drawing a limit on
the president's power. So what might he
do or what might his options be if those
rulings stand?
>> So President Trump does have another
option. He could invoke the Insurrection
Act. It's a kind of nuclear option that
would allow him to use the military for
law enforcement purposes to put down
what he would declare to be a rebellion.
The Insurrection Act is a simply it's a
stronger law than the section of Title
10 that Trump's operating under now. The
Insurrection Act hasn't been invoked for
more than 30 years. The last time it
happened was during the Rodney King
riots. It's been used by presidents in
very specific places. To use it in a
national way would have little or no
precedent, but it's something that he
and his advisers are talking about uh
with greater frequency. Trump even said
at one point that if judges got in his
way, that could be a potential trigger
for him to invoke the act. So, time and
time again, we're seeing the
administration take um these old laws
and old authorities that that haven't
been used uh and and blow the dust off
them and use them in furtherance of
expanding presidential power and more
often than not point them towards their
political opposition. And Steven Miller
in that same interview that I mentioned
on CNN on Monday seemed to be using
language including the word insurrection
where one might interpret that he was
also kind of setting up an argument for
that.
>> Absolutely. The administration often
refers to protesters as insurrectionists
or terrorists which is not just
rhetoric. It's a strategic effort to
broaden those categories. the
administration is actually staking out
legal turf that this is a national
security crisis that justifies the use
of emergency authorities. And the more
they can make the case that the
emergency is real, the harder it's going
to be for the courts to legitimately
intervene.
>> Another thing that's important to
realize is that the facts on the ground
can change. So if this inflammatory
rhetoric inspires more violent actions
by protesters, that actually strengthens
the administration's case in court, that
this is in fact a rebellion.
>> Matt, I want to go back to something you
said a moment ago that was really,
really interesting, which was this idea
that the president might be able to
define his own facts. Basically, the
idea that he could just declare
something as an insurrection and
therefore invoke the powers that he
wants. And I'm curious if that were to
happen in this case,
how likely is it that the courts would
go along with his interpretation?
The Constitution gives the president
tremendous legitimate power. The courts
have already said they have a very, very
small tenil role to play when it comes
to foreign policy and when it comes to
military affairs overseas. And this is
something that President Trump and his
advisers know and have been trying to
make maximum use of. If he were to
invoke the Insurrection Act, those
powers would grow further and the
legitimate role that the courts would
have to play to check President Trump
when it comes to troop deployments would
shrink.
>> It feels safe to assume, Matt, that one
of these cases, maybe in Oregon, maybe
in Illinois, maybe some later case, one
of them might eventually end up in front
of the Supreme Court, which as we know
has been quite favorable to the
president so far.
>> I think that's right.
So, this is shaping up to be one of the
great tests in this ongoing tension
between the executive and the judicial
branch. Are the courts going to continue
to give way to the Trump administration
when it comes to the deployment of US
troops on US soil? And are they going to
do so over the objections of their
judicial brethren and sister, at least
one of whom has now said, "No, this
isn't a rebellion, and yes, it's my
place to say so."
[Music]
>> Matt, thanks so much.
>> Thank you, Rachel.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
>> Uh, Madam Attorney General, let me ask
you this question. Were you consulted by
the White House before they deployed uh
National Guard troops to cities in the
United States?
>> I am not going to discuss any internal
conversations with the White House.
Attorney General Pam Bondi stonewalled
Democrats who demanded answers on
everything from the deployment of
federal troops to Chicago to the
investigation into Tom Hman, President
Trump's borders are who was recorded
accepting a bag with $50,000 in cash in
an undercover FBI investigation.
>> What became of the $50,000?
Did the FBI get it back?
>> Mr. White House, excuse me, Senator
White House, you're welcome to talk to
the FBI.
And Tuesday marked the second
anniversary of the Hamas attack on
Israel, which the country marked with
somber remembrances and new hopes of
ending a conflict that has killed tens
of thousands of Palestinians, including
civilians and combatants.
The Trump administration's Middle East
envoy, Steve Witoff, was expected to
head to Egypt to join peace talks as the
White House signaled optimism about a
potential deal.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Nina
Felman, Mooch Zadi, Claire Tennis,
Getter, and Michelle Bona. It was edited
by Lizo Balon and Mike Benois. Contains
music by Marian Lozano and Diane Wong,
and was engineered by Chris Wood and
Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]